Hey everybody, welcome back to the
channel. Uh, for those of you who are
new here, I'm Evan. I'm a former
metastaf engineer and I'm the current
co-founder of hello.com.
If you are preparing for an upcoming
software engineering interview, then
you'll want to come over to Hello
Interview. What you see here, we have
everything that you need to prepare for
your upcoming interviews across all of
the major interview types. Today's
video, we're going to be focusing on
low-level design. And specifically,
we're going to be focused on what is
oftentimes the most tricky part of
low-level design interviews, which is
concurrency. And so I'm going to break
down the three categories of concurrency
issues that you'll see in your
interviews from correctness,
coordination, and scarcity. Uh show you
examples, the tools you need, the
primitives in order to solve each of
these. I'm going to remain pretty high
level here so we can get through this
quickly, but know that as you see here
on the site, we have detailed breakdowns
for each of them. So you can come over
here and read that. We also have problem
breakdowns where we go into common
interview questions. I think four of the
current seven soon to be eight uh have
concurrent aspects to them. So we probe
concurrency in each of them
respectively. So you can read through
those and see how they end up being
applied. Uh as always, if you like what
we're doing here, please don't forget to
like and subscribe. Enough with intros.
Let's get into it.
So I want you to start by imagining that
you're booking a ticket booking service
similar to Ticket Master, but it's in
process. This is not a distributed
system. This is not system design. This
is low-level design which means that
working we're working within a single
process. And so in this booking system
you can of course browse seats and book
them. And so you start off by writing
this book seat function which is part of
your booking service class where given a
seat you check if that seat is available
and if yes you book it. And so I have
the implementation for you here in Java
as well as in Python if that's better
for you. Now this code may look fine to
you and to be frank actually it is fine
in singlethreaded languages like
TypeScript or something then there is
nothing wrong with this but if you're
operating in a multi-threaded
environment then what's going to happen
if two users try to book the same seat
at exactly the same time this would mean
that two different threads are accessing
the share the same shared state
basically the seats map at roughly the
same time and so let's walk through what
would happen here what you would have is
you would have thread A we can call her
Alice in this case is going to check if
seat 7A is available. It is. Then thread
B is also going to check if seat 7A is
available. It also is because thread A
or Alice here still hasn't completed her
booking. And so the next thing that's
going to happen is that Alex is going to
book and at the same time then Bob is
going to book. Bob's book is going to
overwrite Alice's book. And now Bob is
the person with the seat. Alice thinks
that she has a seat, but she shows up to
the concert and sees Bob there, and
we're in a bunch of trouble. So, this
example illustrates what is the most
common type of concurrency bug that
shows up in interviews. It's called
correctness issues, and it's easy to
miss if you're not specifically looking
for it. But, there are plenty of other
concurrency challenges that arise in
these multi-threaded systems, but they
fall neatly into three main categories.
First, we have correctness, like we just
saw here. Second is coordination, and
then third is scarcity. And once you
know these three categories, you
understand what they are, how they show
up, and how to solve them, then you're
well equipped to handle just about any
concurrency challenge that's going to be
thrown your way in a low-level design or
machine coding interview.
Let's go through each of these
categories one by one, starting with
correctness. So, as we just saw,
correctness issues happen when shared
state gets corrupted because two threads
are trying to access it at the exact
same time. Now, the pattern that you
want to recognize here that you want to
keep an eye out for in your interviews
is oftentimes called check then act.
Check then act. Basically, you check a
condition like right here and then you
act based on that condition. But between
the check and the act, another thread
can come in and change things. So,
obviously in our ticket booking example,
we checked if the seat was available and
then we booked it. And that's two
separate steps. So in that gap between
the check and the action, another thread
can sneak in there and book that seat
out from under us. And this gap is often
times where the bug lives. So this is
the trouble area right here. And this
check then act pattern is probably the
most popular concurrency issue that ends
up showing up in low-level design
interviews. If you have a parking lot
system with multiple entrances, then you
check if the spot is empty and then
assign a car to it. Check then act. rate
limiter, you check if the user is under
their rate limit and then you allow the
request, check, then act. An inventory
system, you check if the sock is
available and then process the order.
It's all the same shape and the goal is
to be able to recognize that. Now, maybe
importantly, most importantly, the fix,
at least at a high level, is that the
check and the action need to happen
together as one atomic operation. This
prevents any thread from being allowed
to come in between here and interrupt
things. The standard tool for this is
called a lock. And each programming
language has its own lock primitives.
You have mutxes in things like Rust and
Go. You have a synchronized block in
Java, which we'll see here in just a
moment. A lock in Python. Mutex or
semaphors in C++. All of these allow
just one thread to execute a section of
code at a time while other threads wait
on that lock to be released. So you
acquire the lock first, do your check,
do your action, and then release the
lock. So let's see what that would look
like. In the Java case, it's going to
look like this. Java uses what's called
a synchronized block. And so everything
within the synchronized block is while
the lock is held. Basically, if you have
the synchronized block, this is when we
take the lock, we operate, and then we
release the lock at the end of that
synchronized block. In the case of
Python, you do with lock and that lock
is typically an instance variable. And
so similar idea here, right? You first
grab the lock and then everything that
is within that block has that lock held
and thus if the lock is held no two
threads can intervene with each other.
If we come back over to our diagram it
would now look like this. You'd have
thread one or Alice check if things are
available. Yes. Uh we would then book it
from Alice. The status equals booked.
And that whole time Bob can't come in
because Alice first grabbed the lock.
And so Alice is holding the lock. She's
able to do both the check and the act
act. Bob is just waiting. And it's only
once that lock is released and she has
set the status of that seat to booked
that Bob then can check if it's
available. And now he's going to
correctly be updated to understand that
the answer is no. The second most common
correctness pattern that shows up is
what's called read modify write. And so
this is when you read a value, you
compute something from it, and then you
write it back. So the classic example is
just incrementing a counter. You have a
counter here where it's currently at
one. We do count plus+. And now this
might look to you like one operation.
It's one line of code, but it's actually
three. We first read the value to see
what it currently is. We add one and
then we write back that new value. And
so just like the example above, if two
threads were doing this at the exact
same time, both might read for example
five. Both might read for example five.
They might might both compute six. They
might both then write six and we're left
with six as the final count when it
should have been seven. We lost an
increment. This shows up obviously in
hit counters, bank account balances,
inventory quantities, metric
aggregation. Basically, anytime you're
updating a value based on its current
state, you're going to run into this
read modify write pattern. Now, the fix
follows the exact same idea. We need to
make this whole operation, this read,
modify, and write atomic. And so for
simple counters, you can actually use
what's called an atomic variable which
handles this at the hardware level,
which is pretty cool. And so modern
CPUs, they have special instructions
like compare and swap that do a read
modify write in a single CPU cycle.
Basically, the hardware guarantees that
no other threads can see that value mid
update. So let's look at the
implementation of the solution. Just
like just like with locks, each major
language provides its own primitive for
an atomic integer. And so in Java it's
called exactly that an atomic integer.
You can instantiate your atomic integer
to whatever you want. In this case zero
maybe we say 10. And then anytime you
want to increment it by one instead of
doing count plus+ you have to do
count.increment and get this is going to
be that hardwell hardware level atomic
operation. And so this would then return
back to you 11 in our case. And it's
going to be using that compare and swap
at the actual CPU. Now, unfortunately,
Python doesn't actually support built-in
atomics. So, the way to solve this in
Python, unfortunately, there is no
atomic that you can use, you're going to
have to just do what we did above, and
you're going to need to use a lock. So,
I know it's a little bit annoying
depending on the language that you're
implementing your low-level design
interview in. Uh you may have an atomic
primitive, you may not. How do you know
when to use each? When do you use an
atomic variable and when do you use a
law? Well, you're going to want to use
an atomic variable when you're updating
just a single variable or counter. So
things like flags or simple statistics.
But the moment that you have to update
two things, the moment that you have to
update two separate variables and they
need to stay consistent with each other,
something like transferring money
between accounts, well then atomics
can't help you here anymore. You need to
rely on the lock. So to summarize, we
had two main patterns that show up in
correctness. We have check then act and
then we have read modify write. Both
have the same root cause, a gap between
operations where another thread can
interfere. And the fix is the same for
both. Make the operation atomic, usually
with a lock, but sometimes you can use
an atomic variable depending on the
language and depending on whether or not
you're updating just a single variable.
The second category of concurrency
problems is what's called coordination.
And so let's say that you are building
zoom in here. Let's say that you're
building a website and users sign up and
you need to send them a welcome email.
But sending an email takes about 500
milliseconds, half a second. and you
don't want the signup request to be
blocked for that full half second. And
so you basically want to hand off that
expensive work. You want to hand off the
sending of the email to a background
thread and then just return the signup
request to the user immediately. So you
have these API threads that need to pass
tasks to email sender or worker threads.
And the natural solution is to just put
a queue between the two of them. So the
producer pushes tasks into the queue and
then the consumers or the email senders
can just pull things off of the queue
and send those emails as they see fit.
This seems simple but in doing so you've
actually introduced two problems. The
first is how does this worker know when
new work has arrived? Let me write that.
How does consumer consumer know that
work arrived and how does it know so
efficiently? We'll talk about this in
just a moment. And then the second is
what happens if work is arriving too
fast for consumer to keep up. So you
could imagine that we have tons of send
emails here. We only have a couple
worker threads and this queue just keeps
getting larger and larger and larger. So
those are the two problems that we need
to solve. And let's go ahead and start
with the first one. So basically your
worker thread needs to be able to wait
for tasks. And now the naive approach is
that your thread is just going to spin
in a loop always checking if there is
work. And so you can see here we'll just
say while true if the que is empty then
try to pull off the queue and process
the task. And this is just going to keep
processing while true basically
non-stop. You can see again our job in
our Python implementation. Well, there's
a clear issue with this and that's that
we're just burning CPU doing nothing.
this thread is fully occupied by just
doing that looping and looping and
looping always checking the queue. Are
you ready? Are you ready? Are you ready?
Are you ready? And this is wasting
valuable CPU resources that we could be
using elsewhere. So the first solution
that you might have thought of is well,
we could sleep and pull. Basically,
let's introduce a sleep here so that
we're not just but maybe we're waiting
just a little bit. And so that would
look something like this. Let me put it
in here for Java. And in this case,
we're going to try to pull. If we didn't
get it, then we're going to sleep for
just 100 milliseconds. And then we'll
try again. This will make sure that
we're wasting less CPU. And I'll paste
in here the same thing for Python, so
you can see what that would look like.
Now, this might be better. You're
wasting fewer cycles, but you're still
wasting cycles, but you've also
introduced latency. And so now if a new
job comes in to send the email that
should take 500 milliseconds, it could
take 600 milliseconds because it could
land and we have to wait this 100
milliseconds before we're even able to
pull it off of the queue. What you
actually want is for the workers to
sleep when there's nothing to do and
then wake up instantly the moment that
that work arrives. The solution is to
use what's called a blocking queue. And
just like with locks and just like with
atomic variables, most major languages
have a blocking q built in. The way that
it works is that the worker calls a
function called take. And if they call
take on the empty queue, then that
thread actually just goes to sleep. And
then when a producer calls put to put
something into the queue, it
automatically wakes up all one of the
sleeping workers saying there's
something for you to process now. So let
me paste this in so you can see what the
solution looks like starting with Java.
And so in Java, we're going to
instantiate, let's ignore that for now.
We're going to instantiate a blocking Q.
And so when a new user comes in, we're
going to put onto that Q and return
success. Cool. That thread is done. Now
on the other end for our consumer, while
it's still in a while loop, if it calls
Q.take and this is empty, it's just
going to go to sleep at this moment.
It's going to say everybody else can use
the CPU. I don't need it now. And then
it's not until that next put comes in
that this is going to automatically wake
up, process the task, and then repeat.
If it's empty, sleep, and so on. And I
can show you what that implementation
looks like in Python as well. Same idea.
Python's Q is actually a blocking Q by
default. Let me remove that for now.
It's actually a blocking Q by default.
And so the same thing, you have a put,
but instead of take, you have a get in
Python. So slightly different API, but
the same general concept. So now let's
come back to what that second issue was
within coordination. Basically, what
happens if a worker is arriving? If work
is arriving too fast for the consumers
to be able to keep up, you could say
maybe there's marketing emails that just
went out. 50,000 users just clicked on
the link all at once. This generated a
bunch of background tasks, a bunch of
emails to be sent out. The queue grew
and grew and grew. It's eventually
unbounded and as a result, we run out of
memory and the entire process crashes.
That's what we're trying to avoid here.
And so the solution is to use a bounded
blocking queue. You basically set a
maximum size and when it's full,
producers block until there's room. This
is what's called back pressure. It's
very important. So the system naturally
slows down when it can't keep up. And so
blocking cues will solve this problem
for us. And the implementation of a
blocking Q is really straightforward.
You actually saw me remove it cuz I was
a little ahead of myself. But it's just
that when you instantiate these blocking
cues, you can instantiate them um with
the maximum number of items that you
want in the queue before we start to
apply some back pressure. And that'll
naturally make it a bounded block and Q.
So you can see that in the case there.
And then in Python, we already removed
it, but it was that max size 1,00
parameter. Now, using a blocking Q,
specifically a bounded blocking Q,
you're going to almost always want to
make sure that you bound it. I see no
reason why you would ever not bound it.
But this is going to show up in
interviews whenever you need to process
something asynchronously. So taskulers,
background job processor, message cues.
If work is flowing un in from one
component to another, from one thread
specifically to another, then that's
coordination. And the blocking queue is
almost always your answer. There's more
to it, of course. How do you size the
buffer appropriately? What happens
during shutdown? Uh what if blocking
isn't acceptable on your request path?
The main thing to remember for your
interview is that if you need
coordination, then you're going to want
to use a bounded blocking queue.
The final category of concurrency
problems is called scarcity. And this is
when you need to limit concurrent access
to finite resources. So for example, I
want you to say that you're calling an
external API that only allows 10
concurrent requests. That's its rate
limit. And you have 50 threads that
might all be trying to call it
simultaneously. You need some way to say
only 10 of you can be here at any given
time.
The tool for this is what's called a
semaphore. You probably remember
semaphors. I'm sure you learned them in
school. And you can think of semaphors
conceptually as just a bucket of
permits. Before you do some operation,
you grab a permit out of the bucket. And
once you finish that operation, you put
the permit back. If you arrive and there
are no permits in the bucket, then you
need to wait until somebody comes and re
replenishes the permits. So let's look
at the implementations and again Java
and Python. In Java, you have a built-in
semaphore just like the others. This is
present in most the languages. And in
this case, let's say that you're
downloading some expensive file and you
want to make sure that you're only
downloading five files at the same time.
Maybe you don't want to run out of
memory or you don't want to run out of
I/IO. And so you first acquire that
permit. You basically grab the permit
out of the bucket. You do that expensive
download and then you release the
permit. And this is going to guarantee
that only five threads can be doing this
download at the same time. Exact same
concept in Python. You have the
semaphore, you acquire, and you release
respectively. Now, here's one
interesting thing to call out. What
happens if this do download threw an
exception? If this were to throw an
exception, then we would break out of
this download function. The exception
would bubble up and we would never
release or return the semaphore, right?
We would never return that permit. If
that happened five times, then your
bucket of permits, to continue with this
analogy, would be completely empty. None
of your semaphors would have released
because they all threw and they'd be
holding on to that semaphore forever.
This would bring everything to a halting
uh to a screeching halt, excuse me, and
there would be no more downloads. This
is a pretty common bug that you want to
look out for in your interviews whenever
you're dealing with scarcity is can I
guarantee that this semaphore is going
to be put back, that this permit is
going to be put back so that others can
use it. And the solution, fortunately,
is really straightforward. You just want
to wrap this in a try catch with a
finally. So, you're going to try the do
download. If it fails or anything goes
wrong at all, then the permit is going
to be released. So, we can do that exact
same thing. Of course, in Python, you
all know probably what this looks like,
but for completeness, it'll look just
like that. Now, sometimes it's the case
that you're not just counting, you're
not just counting the number of
requests, but you're actually managing
actual objects that have state, right?
Stare with me. This is this is pretty
important. So, the example here would be
like database connections. They're the
classic example. Each connection holds
an open TCP socket. It consumes memory.
it tracks transition state and so you
can't create a new one for every single
request or every single query you want
to hit the database with. Instead, you
create a connection pool. You create
maybe 10 open connections and then all
your threads can reuse those 10 open
connections so we're not having to open
and close connections all the time. And
this is a different flavor of a scarcity
problem. In this case, we're just
counting. In the case that I'm
describing now, you have a fixed set of
resources. And the solution is the same
that we saw in coordination. You can use
a blocking queue. You fill it up with
your objects threads take one out, use
it, and then put it back. So it's the
same underlying primitive, a blocking
queue, but we're not using it in quite
the same way. We're basically using it
as like a bag of objects or a pool of
objects that can be reused. Let me show
you exactly what that would look like.
Um, so let me just write this. when
managing actual
objects with state.
So here's the Java implementation.
Again, we have our blocking Q. We should
always instantiate it with a limit,
right? Um, and then you can load up your
connections. So maybe we have 10
connections. So we put 10 connections
into our pool. Those are now in the
queue. And every time you want to run a
query, the first thing that you're going
to do is take from the pool. Of course,
if none already, then we're just blocked
and we're waiting, as you remember from
coordination. We're going to run our
query. And then finally, we're going to
put it back into the pool. So, as
opposed to releasing locks or putting
the semaphore back, we're going to just
put the connection back into the pool.
Basically, calling put again, and the
next thread that is waiting can pick up
at that point. I'll show you, of course,
what it looks like in Python, too.
exact same idea there. The pattern of
these two scarcity problems is the same
either way. You acquire something
scarce, you use it, you then release it,
and you make sure that release happens
even when things fail by using that
finally block.
All right, so let's zoom back out here
as we wrap things up. If you find
yourself in a low-level design interview
and concurrency comes up, here's your
mental checklist. The first thing you
want to ask yourself is that is there
shared state that multiple threads can
access? If the answer is yes, then
you're talking about a correctness
issue. And for correctness issues, we
talked about both read modify write as
well as check then act. And in either
case, you want to use either a lock or
atomic variables. The next thing you
want to consider is is work flowing from
one thread to another. If so, then
that's a coordination problem. And so
you think about what happens when
there's no work and what happens when
there's too much work. And in both
cases, you probably want to use a
blocking queue or bounded blocking
queue. And then third, we talked about
if there was a fixed limit of something,
then it's scarcity. And so, make sure
that resources always get released, of
course, in that finally block. Uh, and
then you probably want to reach for
either a semaphore or a blocking queue
to be your pool as we discussed. Now,
most uh most interview problems, they
map cleanly to one of these three
categories. And so, once you're able to
recognize these three, then you can see
them in the interview and you know
exactly which solutions to apply. And
things end up being pretty simple. So
hopefully this was valuable. As I had
mentioned, we have full written
breakdowns on each of these correctness,
coordination, and scarcity with lots
more examples and each of the core
programming languages, what you should
look out for in interview, the corner
cases, far more detail than I've gone
into in this video. That's going to be
linked in the description that you can
check out. Unfortunately, that's only
for premium users. Um, and then as
always, if you like the content, like
and subscribe. Uh, we'll be back with
more soon. Take care.